---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on TIS-100"
categories: challenge
permalink: /tis-100-thoughts/
---

The other weekend I finally finished up a game called TIS-100. I've been
playing around with it from time to time for the last several months and it is
quite fun. Now, to help me get back into the habit of writing posts for this
website, I thought I'd go ahead and jot down some of my thoughts on the overall
experience.

If the reader wants a more in depth overview of the game, they can of course
find it in other articles and posts, but suffice it to say, TIS-100 is an
exercise in programming within an extremely limited environment. This computing
machine that the player has the pleasure to program against consists of a two
dimensional grid of cores. Each of these cores contains two registers, a memory
bank that can hold up to 15 assembly like instructions, and the ability to pass
messages to adjacent cores. This actually doesn't sound too bad, but very
quickly you will begin to run into deadlocks and a shortage of places to store
your data. That is, until you learn the basic techniques required to cope with
this alien architecture.

So the first thing I would note of this game, is that it is very free-form. It
really is up to the player on how they decide to play. One can play the game
simply to solve the various puzzles, or one can try to optimize their solutions
using different criterion such as speed or code size. I personally opted to
just solve the puzzles and move on. That being said, I am definitely
considering looking into optimization techniques that can be applied to this
system and then do subsequent posts on any interesting topics that come about.

As far as difficulty goes, it really isn't too bad. The first half is pretty
simple. I found myself kind of randomly typing until it worked. The later
levels however, are much more interesting. These are complex enough that they
will require you to plan ahead. In fact, you will most likely start to
recognize patterns and will resort to using techniques that you discovered from
previous levels. None of this is prompted, which again emphasizes the free-form
nature of this game. You will learn how to tackle the challenges presented to
you, and it will be completely of your own accord. If you are a programmer, you
won't have any real difficulties getting through this. You may need to take a
break and come back in a day or two with a fresh mind, but you shouldn't ever
get completely stumped.

That being said, the creators of the game have bestowed upon us an expansion
pack with additional levels that ramp up the difficulty. I haven't started
these yet, but I have heard that they include tasks such as prime factorization
and sorting sequences that don't fit in a stack node.

My initial run through of TIS-100 was fun, and I'm looking forward to
further exploring what this game has to offer.
